README.adoc, before:

= Datomic Cloud Backup and Restore
:author: Tony Kay
:lang: en
:encoding: UTF-8
:source-highlighter: coderay
:source-language: clojure

ifdef::env-github[]
:tip-caption: :bulb:
:note-caption: :information_source:
:important-caption: :heavy_exclamation_mark:
:caution-caption: :fire:
:warning-caption: :warning:
endif::[]

ifdef::env-github[]
toc::[]
endif::[]


image:https://img.shields.io/clojars/v/com.fulcrologic/datomic-cloud-backup.svg[link=https://clojars.org/com.fulcrologic/datomic-cloud-backup]

This small library allows you to incrementally save the transaction log of a Datomic
cloud database (may also work with on-prem, though there is an official story there).
Datomic Cloud (at the time of this writing) only has a way to pull data into dev-local,
but no way to actually store a proper incremental backup for business continuity reasons.

== Usage

This library supports creating a clone of a Datomic database by reading the transaction log and
saving that to a durable storage (incrementally). Restoration of the database involves playing back
this transaction log into a new database. The one major complication is that the new database *will* assign
different IDs to the new entities as they are transacted, thus, we must keep track of what these new IDs are
in the new database so we can remap them in later incremental steps.

Thus, there is a need for two kinds of durable storage (they have different characteristics, so they
are represented as two protocols):

* `BackupStore` - A place to store the actual transactions
* `IDMapper` - A fast durable K/V store that can track ID mappings in the new database over (a potentially long) time.

This library comes with a sample `BackupStore` based on AWS s3, and an `IDMapper` that uses Redis (via carmine).

If you want to use these, then you MUST add the following two libraries to your dependencies (they are
not included as transitive dependencies in case you want to use something else):

* `com.datomic/dev-local`         - if you want to play with it in dev mode
* `com.taoensso/carmine`          - if you want to use the RedisIDMapper
* `com.amazonaws/aws-java-sdk-s3` - if you want to use the S3BackupStore
* `com.taoensso/nippy`            - for S3BackupStore

You will then need to add this library to your application that you are deploying to the cloud,
and run, on a periodic basis, an incremental backup.

Here's a very naive implementation that would allow you to clone an entire database using
resources in the cloud.

[source]
-----
(ns com.fulcrologic.datomic-cloud-backup.cloning-test
  (:require
    [datomic.client.api :as d]
    [com.fulcrologic.datomic-cloud-backup.protocols :as dcbp]
    [com.fulcrologic.datomic-cloud-backup.cloning :as cloning]
    [com.fulcrologic.datomic-cloud-backup.ram-stores :refer [new-ram-store new-ram-mapper]]
    [com.fulcrologic.datomic-cloud-backup.s3-backup-store :refer [new-s3-store aws-credentials?]]
    [com.fulcrologic.datomic-cloud-backup.redis-id-mapper :refer [new-redis-mapper available? clear-mappings!]]
    [fulcro-spec.core :refer [specification behavior component assertions =>]])
  (:import (java.util UUID)))

(defonce client (d/client {:server-type :dev-local
                           :storage-dir :mem
                           :system      "test"}))

(defn backup! [dbname source-connection target-store]
  ;; Normally, you'd not write this as a tight loop, but would instead monitor if it is returning
  ;; positive numbers and pause when it isn't, as an infinite loop to keep streaming.
  (loop [n (cloning/backup-next-segment! dbname source-connection target-store 2)]
    (when (pos? n)
      (recur (cloning/backup-next-segment! dbname source-connection target-store 2)))))

(defn restore! [dbname target-conn db-store mapper]
  ;; Normally you'd have some hot standby continuously running this loop. The `next-start` may not yet
  ;; be available, so if it stays the same, delay for a bit to see if a new one arrives.
  (loop [start-t 0]
    (let [next-start (cloning/restore-segment! dbname target-conn db-store mapper start-t {})]
      (when (< start-t next-start)
        (recur next-start)))))

(comment
  ;; Clone a db using RAM resources. Probably runs out of memory for anything
  ;; but small dbs.
  (let [c (d/connect client {:db-name "some-database"})
        target-c (d/connect client {:db-name "restored"})
        store (new-ram-store)
        mapper (new-ram-mapper)]
    (backup! :some-database c store)
    (restore! :some-database target-c store mapper))

  ;; Same thing, but uses S3 resources and Redis. Should handle any db size as
  ;; long as Redis has space for all of the ID mappings
  (let [c (d/connect client {:db-name "some-database"})
        target-c (d/connect client {:db-name "restored"})
        store (new-s3-store "my-s3-bucket")
        mapper (new-redis-mapper {:spec {:host "localhost"}})]
    (backup! :some-database c store)
    (restore! :some-database target-c store mapper)))
-----

The Redis connection options are as described in the https://github.com/ptaoussanis/carmine[Carmine docs].

Notes:

* The call to `backup-next-segment!` figures out where to start automatically. You tell
  it how many transactions you want it to try to do (it stops if there are no more) and
  it returns how many were done. Thus, if it returns 0 (or less than you asked) then
  it is at or very near the end. If you sleep for some amount of time and try again,
  then you'll be doing a hot streaming replication of your database.
* The call to `restore-segment!` returns the next segment start time that it needs
  in order to continue. If you call it with a `start-t` that does not yet exist, then
  it will return that same `start-t`. Thus, you could sleep for some time and try again.
  Doing so in an infinite loop results in streaming restoration of your database.

The Redis mapper is only needed, as you can see, on the restore side. The store needs to
be visible on both sides. Thus, an S3 bucket with proper permissions is the perfect way
to share the streaming data across regions/zones.

== NOTES

* The :db/id of entities in the new database will *not* match the :db/id of the old entities in the old
database. Refs will be fixed with respect to this, but if you store *external* data (e.g. s3 data indexed
by :db/id) then those things will need to be remapped as well (which the IDMapper can help with).
* So far this library is *very* lightly tested (soon to be remedied).
* You cannot *write* transactions to the target database during a restore and expect the restore to be able
to continue. The restore tries to include the reified transactions to maintain any auditing data
you may have added to the database. As such it is also restoring the original tx time, which
it cannot do if you transact something that has a time close to "now".
* Using an elision predicate on the restore can cause transactions to become empty. Those transactions will be skipped.

== License

The MIT License (MIT)
Copyright (c) 2017-2019, Fulcrologic, LLC

Permission is hereby granted, free of charge, to any person obtaining a copy of this software and associated
documentation files (the "Software"), to deal in the Software without restriction, including without limitation the
rights to use, copy, modify, merge, publish, distribute, sublicense, and/or sell copies of the Software, and to permit
persons to whom the Software is furnished to do so, subject to the following conditions:

The above copyright notice and this permission notice shall be included in all copies or substantial portions of the
Software.

THE SOFTWARE IS PROVIDED "AS IS", WITHOUT WARRANTY OF ANY KIND, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT LIMITED TO THE
WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTABILITY, FITNESS FOR A PARTICULAR PURPOSE AND NONINFRINGEMENT. IN NO EVENT SHALL THE AUTHORS OR
COPYRIGHT HOLDERS BE LIABLE FOR ANY CLAIM, DAMAGES OR OTHER LIABILITY, WHETHER IN AN ACTION OF CONTRACT, TORT OR
OTHERWISE, ARISING FROM, OUT OF OR IN CONNECTION WITH THE SOFTWARE OR THE USE OR OTHER DEALINGS IN THE SOFTWARE.

Commit message:

fixed parallel backup method signature to be consistent

README.adoc, after:

= Datomic Cloud Backup and Restore
:author: Tony Kay
:lang: en
:encoding: UTF-8
:source-highlighter: coderay
:source-language: clojure

ifdef::env-github[]
:tip-caption: :bulb:
:note-caption: :information_source:
:important-caption: :heavy_exclamation_mark:
:caution-caption: :fire:
:warning-caption: :warning:
endif::[]

ifdef::env-github[]
toc::[]
endif::[]


image:https://img.shields.io/clojars/v/com.fulcrologic/datomic-cloud-backup.svg[link=https://clojars.org/com.fulcrologic/datomic-cloud-backup]

This small library allows you to incrementally save the transaction log of a Datomic
cloud database (may also work with on-prem, though there is an official story there).
Datomic Cloud (at the time of this writing) only has a way to pull data into dev-local,
but no way to actually store a proper incremental backup for business continuity reasons.

== Usage

This library supports creating a clone of a Datomic database by reading the transaction log and
saving that to a durable storage (incrementally). Restoration of the database involves playing back
this transaction log into a new database. The one major complication is that the new database *will* assign
different IDs to the new entities as they are transacted, thus, we must keep track of what these new IDs are
in the new database so we can remap them in later incremental steps.

Thus, there is a need for two kinds of durable storage (they have different characteristics, so they
are represented as two protocols):

* `BackupStore` - A place to store the actual transactions
* `IDMapper` - A fast durable K/V store that can track ID mappings in the new database over (a potentially long) time.

This library comes with a sample `BackupStore` based on AWS s3, and an `IDMapper` that uses Redis (via carmine).

=== Extra Dependencies May Be Required

If you want to use these, then you MUST add the following two libraries to your dependencies (they are
not included as transitive dependencies in case you want to use something else):

* `com.datomic/dev-local`         - if you want to play with it in dev mode
* `com.taoensso/carmine`          - if you want to use the RedisIDMapper
* `com.amazonaws/aws-java-sdk-s3` - if you want to use the S3BackupStore
* `com.taoensso/nippy`            - for S3BackupStore

You will then need to add this library to your application that you are deploying to the cloud,
and run, on a periodic basis, an incremental backup.

=== Sample Backup Strategy

Here's a very naive implementation that would allow you to clone an entire database using
resources in the cloud.

[source]
-----
(ns com.fulcrologic.datomic-cloud-backup.cloning-test
  (:require
    [datomic.client.api :as d]
    [com.fulcrologic.datomic-cloud-backup.protocols :as dcbp]
    [com.fulcrologic.datomic-cloud-backup.cloning :as cloning]
    [com.fulcrologic.datomic-cloud-backup.ram-stores :refer [new-ram-store new-ram-mapper]]
    [com.fulcrologic.datomic-cloud-backup.s3-backup-store :refer [new-s3-store aws-credentials?]]
    [com.fulcrologic.datomic-cloud-backup.redis-id-mapper :refer [new-redis-mapper available? clear-mappings!]]
    [fulcro-spec.core :refer [specification behavior component assertions =>]])
  (:import (java.util UUID)))

(defonce client (d/client {:server-type :dev-local
                           :storage-dir :mem
                           :system      "test"}))

(defn backup! [dbname source-connection target-store]
  ;; Normally, you'd not write this as a tight loop, but would instead monitor if it is returning
  ;; positive numbers and pause when it isn't, as an infinite loop to keep streaming.
  (loop [n (cloning/backup-next-segment! dbname source-connection target-store 2)]
    (when (pos? n)
      (recur (cloning/backup-next-segment! dbname source-connection target-store 2)))))

(defn restore! [dbname target-conn db-store mapper]
  ;; Normally you'd have some hot standby continuously running this loop. The `next-start` may not yet
  ;; be available, so if it stays the same, delay for a bit to see if a new one arrives.
  (loop [start-t 0]
    (let [next-start (cloning/restore-segment! dbname target-conn db-store mapper start-t {})]
      (when (< start-t next-start)
        (recur next-start)))))

(comment
  ;; Clone a db using RAM resources. Probably runs out of memory for anything
  ;; but small dbs.
  (let [c (d/connect client {:db-name "some-database"})
        target-c (d/connect client {:db-name "restored"})
        store (new-ram-store)
        mapper (new-ram-mapper)]
    (backup! :some-database c store)
    (restore! :some-database target-c store mapper))

  ;; Same thing, but uses S3 resources and Redis. Should handle any db size as
  ;; long as Redis has space for all of the ID mappings
  (let [c (d/connect client {:db-name "some-database"})
        target-c (d/connect client {:db-name "restored"})
        store (new-s3-store "my-s3-bucket")
        mapper (new-redis-mapper {:spec {:host "localhost"}})]
    (backup! :some-database c store)
    (restore! :some-database target-c store mapper)))
-----

The Redis connection options are as described in the https://github.com/ptaoussanis/carmine[Carmine docs].

Notes:

* The call to `backup-next-segment!` figures out where to start automatically. You tell
  it how many transactions you want it to try to do (it stops if there are no more) and
  it returns how many were done. Thus, if it returns 0 (or less than you asked) then
  it is at or very near the end. If you sleep for some amount of time and try again,
  then you'll be doing a hot streaming replication of your database.
* The call to `restore-segment!` returns the next segment start time that it needs
  in order to continue. If you call it with a `start-t` that does not yet exist, then
  it will return that same `start-t`. Thus, you could sleep for some time and try again.
  Doing so in an infinite loop results in streaming restoration of your database.

The Redis mapper is only needed, as you can see, on the restore side. The store needs to
be visible on both sides. Thus, an S3 bucket with proper permissions is the perfect way
to share the streaming data across regions/zones.

=== Low-level Backups

The naive implementation above uses the store itself to find the next place to resume the
backup.

The base utility function `backup-segment!` is a little more general-purpose. It allows you
to explicitly specify the transaction range to back up. This would allow you to track
your progress in an alternate fashion, or build more complex approaches to backing up
large amounts of data.

One such approach is documented in the next section.

=== Parallel Backups

There is a function that is useful when you want to run an initial backup on a large database called
`parallel-backup!`. It runs a complete backup of the database using `pmap` to provide concurrency
that will adjust to the hardware on hand.

My preliminary tests using a t3-medium instances with an s3 store in an alternate region while backing up
1000 transactions per s3 object can back up about 40k transactions per minute using the parallel backup
utility. This speed, of course, could vary dramatically based on your average datom size, and might change
speed as the I/O subsystems scale out.

== NOTES

* The :db/id of entities in the new database will *not* match the :db/id of the old entities in the old
database. Refs will be fixed with respect to this, but if you store *external* data (e.g. s3 data indexed
by :db/id) then those things will need to be remapped as well (which the IDMapper can help with).
* So far this library is *very* lightly tested (soon to be remedied).
* You cannot *write* transactions to the target database during a restore and expect the restore to be able
to continue. The restore tries to include the reified transactions to maintain any auditing data
you may have added to the database. As such it is also restoring the original tx time, which
it cannot do if you transact something that has a time close to "now".
* Using an elision predicate on the restore can cause transactions to become empty. Those transactions will be skipped.

== License

The MIT License (MIT)
Copyright (c) 2017-2019, Fulcrologic, LLC

Permission is hereby granted, free of charge, to any person obtaining a copy of this software and associated
documentation files (the "Software"), to deal in the Software without restriction, including without limitation the
rights to use, copy, modify, merge, publish, distribute, sublicense, and/or sell copies of the Software, and to permit
persons to whom the Software is furnished to do so, subject to the following conditions:

The above copyright notice and this permission notice shall be included in all copies or substantial portions of the
Software.

THE SOFTWARE IS PROVIDED "AS IS", WITHOUT WARRANTY OF ANY KIND, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT LIMITED TO THE
WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTABILITY, FITNESS FOR A PARTICULAR PURPOSE AND NONINFRINGEMENT. IN NO EVENT SHALL THE AUTHORS OR
COPYRIGHT HOLDERS BE LIABLE FOR ANY CLAIM, DAMAGES OR OTHER LIABILITY, WHETHER IN AN ACTION OF CONTRACT, TORT OR
OTHERWISE, ARISING FROM, OUT OF OR IN CONNECTION WITH THE SOFTWARE OR THE USE OR OTHER DEALINGS IN THE SOFTWARE.
